This video is made possible by Blinkist.
And it's to read all the books you want to get all the knowledge you need. Well,
probably not. Right. Everyone is busier than ever.
It's harder than ever to spend time learning. And even when you try it,
there are so many distractions like that tempting video about some nonsense over
there on the rights, or maybe it's the opposite right now,
you're stuck at home due to the Corona virus and the thought of going to a
library or browsing a bookshop seems a bit too risky.
Or you might think that you don't have enough time to read. Well, good news.
Even if you don't, you do, if you use Blinkist,
Blinkist is an app that takes the best insights and need to know info from
thousands of nonfiction books and condenses them into 15 minutes salaries,
which you can read or listen to. They have a huge library and 14 million users,
14 million the team at visual politic, our ideal Blinkist customers.
We find we can actually fit reading a book through Blinkist into a break time or
a commute to a shoot whilst still keeping up with a pretty crazy work schedule.
They've got tons of popular titles, like thinking fast and slow from Daniel.
Conaman also tons of political books.
And if you want to take a look back at the history,
they've got great condensed versions of books,
like the silk roads by Peter Frank Japan,
the first 100 people to go to blinkist.com forward slash visual politic,
going to get unlimited access for one week to try it out. It also gets 25% off.
If you want the full membership move fast,
get started on catching up on all those great books that you haven't got round
to reading the seven day trial it's completely free.
And you can cancel at any time during that trial,
if you're not completely into it, but I'm sure. Yeah.
You will be.
Scene 79 was a difficult year in that year.
Iran's Islamic revolution and the seizure of the United States embassy
interferon took place in Afghanistan after a series of assassinations,
including that of the United States ambassador himself and accrue to tar.
The Soviet union began its armed intervention by deploying thousands and
thousands of men. Thanks. And all kinds of military equipment do Afghan soil.
Also in 1979, Saddam Hussein came to power.
There was the occupation of a great Moscow Mecca that put the Saudi Arabian
Royal family up against the ropes.
And to top it off the signing of the peace treaty between Israel and Egypt
serves to infuriate the Arab world. And as if all that weren't enough,
Iran's Islamic revolution caused oil production in Iran at the time,
one of the world's largest crude oil producers to collapse by about 75%,
75% something, which I'm sure you can imagine.
Let's do an immediate energy crisis around the entire planet.
And just a few months,
the price of oil sword by 150% inflation and unemployment
skyrocketed throughout the Western world and fuel shortages caused Americans to
wait hours in long Hughes, just to be able to fill up their gas tanks.
Suddenly Americans understood that the distant Persian Gulf was essential
imperative, absolutely key to the health and stability of the world economy.
And at the time things looked so bad that in 1980 U S president Jimmy Carter,
and remember this is a president known mostly for not wanting to know anything
about military interventions was forced to take action
In his state of the union address in January,
1980 Carter blue came to that United States would use whatever force was
necessary to safeguard the oil fields in the Persian Gulf.
It is what became known as the Carter doctrine.
Of course at the time the Soviet union was first and foremost in his mind in
Washington, they were terrified that the Soviet empire,
which at the time was bordering Iran and also had thousands of combat troops
deployed in Afghanistan would take advantage of the chaos to invade that region.
This situation demands,
careful thought steady nerves and resolute action, not only for this year,
but for many years to come,
it demands collective efforts to meet this new threat to security in the Persian
Gulf and in Southwest Asia.
And since then, all us presidents,
both Democrats and Republicans alike have adopted the Carter doctrine as their
own, since it was launched.
This policy was perhaps the most important item on the U S foreign agenda.
And one of the critical elements on which international order is based.
Don't forget the we're talking about a strategy,
a policy that has resulted in endless military interventions.
These include operation.
Ernest will the largest Naval escort operative since world war two to the first
Gulf war operation desert Fox and the Iraq war among dozens and dozens of
operations.
It is also the same car to doctrine,
but explained to the United States having more than 55,000 combat units
permanently deployed in the middle East.
According to data collected by the Washington post,
we are talking about a mammoth deployment that includes intelligence units,
special operation groups, bomber squadrons. And for example,
the us Navy fifth fleet, a fleet led by the aircraft carrier,
USS Dwight D Eisenhower and consisting of more than 20 warships and more than
15,000 soldiers since mid 2019.
This presence in the Gulf even includes the Juul of the us air force,
the F 22 rappers.
Yeah.
Despite such an arsenal being poised and ready to face all out war.
The truth is that the Obama administration in its second term,
and particularly the Trump administration have tried to enter this Carter
doctrine Watson for RO,
why we've talked about this a lot here on visual politics,
thanks to the fracking revolution.
The Persian Gulf is apparently no longer as important to the world economy as it
was just a few years ago.
But.
When it comes to the truth,
the United States has come up against the harsh reality.
All signs indicate that its Arab allies are enabled to ensure stability in this
region of the world. And that's something that makes us sit up and take notice.
When we consider that Gulf Petro monarchies have been spending real fortunes on
their armed forces for years, for example,
Saudi Arabia alone has spent more than $300 billion on its armed forces over the
past five years, year after year,
Saudi Arabia is the third ranking country in the world for having the largest
military behind only the United States and China. And of course,
it's not just about Saudi Arabia,
the rest of the Arab Gulf countries also spend a real fortune on their armies to
get an idea that United Arab Emirates has a military budget equivalent to that
of.
Right.
However,
despite all the tens and tens of billions of dollars that Petrie monarchy spent
every year on their armed forces, every time something happens,
we always end up encountering news like this.
October, 2019,
Trump is sending more troops to Saudi Arabia foreign policy.
And it's at this point that two questions need to be asked.
Why do golf shakes spend so much money on their armed forces?
And more importantly,
what on earth is going on that these forces continue to be so inept friends,
Saudi Arabia has one of the largest and most expensive armies on the planet.
It's the most significant buyer of us weaponry.
And yet when it comes to the crunch,
a simple drone strike is able to bring the kingdom to its knees.
Let's not even get started about defending the sea lanes in the Strait of
Hormuz. For those of you who don't know,
the Strait of Hormuz is a narrow strip of water through which about one fifth of
all oil production in the world passes every day,
almost 20 million barrels of oil. That is we are talking about the main artery,
the most important artery in the economic systems of all Arab countries,
the place where their crude oil exports pass through and therefore the path for
converting their oil into the coveted petrodollars. Well,
despite this and the tens and tens of thousands of millions of dollars spent
each year on their armed forces,
it is not clear that they were even able to keep this passage open.
What's the reason for such a disaster.
How is it possible that so much money is spent and yet they are not even able to
protect the root that guarantees their immense wealth? Well,
we can find at least three reasons for such abject failure, listen up.
Siri sticky fingers, let's be on it.
Defense spending is often the most patriotic and at the same time,
the most opaque and touchy part of all budgets for the vast majority of
governments, according to transparency, international estimates,
more than $20 billion each year disappears due to corruption linked to the
military industry. And you know what? It's not that surprising.
Think about it for a moment.
Military equipment purchases are made from very few manufacturers.
So competition is reduced.
Contracts are arbitrarily decided by just a few people.
And it's very easy to justify virtually any move with two magic words,
national security, As you can see,
we are looking at the perfect breeding ground for corruption,
and you may be surprised, but scientific studies seem clear.
There is a direct correlation between military spending and corruption.
Of course not all places are the same.
The more opaque the institutions in a particular country, the,
the impact these issues will have.
And I'm sure no one will be surprised to hear that in this matter,
the Petro monarchies in the Persian Gulf take first prize with the exception of
Kuwait,
which more or less has a relatively operational parliament in these countries,
the making of any government decision and especially those related in military
spending is absolutely dependent on the Royal families in practice.
These countries are managed as family estates and that makes the institutions
very opaque and with very limited scope to control,
if you have influence and are well connected,
you're in the perfect situation to fill your pockets with public contracts.
This explains why it is that in these countries. Yeah,
acquisition of weapons has usually been accompanied by enormous overpricing and
kickbacks bribes,
and the greasing of palms that are filled the pockets of many princes and high
or authorities.
Defense related projects are highly secretive and subject to no ministry of
finance oversight or controls Saudi Prince Alwaleed bin. Talal.
One of the most famous cases was that off Prince Bandar in Salta,
former Saudi ambassador to Washington and former head of the Saudi intelligence
service.
This has been disclosed. This Prince bought an entire village,
an 800 hectares of land in an area of central England with the money he received
in bribes for his part in a mega contract signed in 1985 to buy the tornado
fighter bomber a contract that in 20 years,
but a total of more than 40 billion pounds in the coffers of the British
military aircraft manufacturer BAE systems,
we are talking about the biggest agreement to sell military equipment in UK
history, a contract,
which more than 6 billion pounds in bribes could have been paid according to
sources in the British press itself. That is more than $12 billion in bribes.
In fact,
Prince Bandar himself was pretty clear about the matter listen closely to the
statements he made in 2000. And one.
If you tell me that building this whole country out of 400 billion that we
misused or got 50 billion, I'll tell you. Yeah.
So what we did not invent corruption.
This has happened since Adam and Eve it's human nature, Prince Bandar.
Another example is that of Prince Minitab bin Abdullah,
who is suspected to have diverted a few billion dollars, you know,
just some small change from the Saudi national guard
to divert the money.
He hired Phantom employees and use them to pay real fortunes,
to buy equipment from companies that he owned. For example,
the purchase of walkie-talkies come on,
walkie talkies with a price tag similar to that of a Mercedes S-Class.
Can you imagine what a deal straight to your pocket? Of course,
but wait a minute.
Don't think just for a moment that these princes were just a couple of isolated
cases, not at all, perhaps these two cases illustrate a special kind of greed,
but the truth is that it is a fairly common practice. In fact,
this explains why the countries of the Persian Gulf are among those with the
worst results in defense integrity index developed by transparency
international, but that's not the end of it. No, no, there's still more.
[Inaudible] question of diplomacy.
Look at this headline for the Gulf States, diplomacy involves buying weapons.
They don't need the economist.
In 2018 when the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia announced the blockade on
Qatar, this country's air force was almost a joke. However, do you know what?
One of the first things the Qatari government did to respond to this blockade
was nothing less than signing more than $20 billion in contracts.
So by nearly 100 new aircraft from three different countries, the American FFT,
the French Rafale and European Euro fighters PATAR did not even have enough
pilots to operate this new air force, a new combat force larger than that.
Of most European countries.
You see Gulf Petrie monarchies have a common practice spending a fistful of
Petro dollars on new military toys.
Every time they want to improve their international relations.
And the truth is it's not such a foolish plat after rule.
The military industry only sells to governments.
So it's marketing campaigns of basically aimed at lobbying and the Arab shakes
are very clear about it.
What better way to win the support of a bunch of politicians than to use the
resources of the military.
Industry.
Petri monarchies, not only buy equipment,
they don't need all that is overpriced.
They sometimes buy non-compatible equipment from different sellers. For example,
in the case,
we have seen of Qatar buying the fifteens Rafale and Euro fighters will mean
having to train their pilots in three different combat systems stocking up on
spare parts for the various aircraft and having to develop different processes
for the maintenance and use of each of the models.
Which doesn't make sense.
Not only does it make the budget more expensive,
but it undermines combat capacity,
but what difference does it make fundamentally the purpose of the contract had
as much to do with public relations as it did with defense.
It's all about control.
There is still a third factor that explains why Arab armies are often so
expensive and at the same time. So in operative,
this factor has a lot to do with control and what the international Institute
for strategic studies calls the brightness factor that is to take on the most
expensive,
most modern and most striking weapons to reinforce the popularity of governments
among the people to feed national pride and ultimately to act as a highly
visible elements of deterrence to their enemies.
Then there's also the issue of the arms race.
The first goal of Arab monarchies is to protect themselves.
So armies have to be very well controlled. In other words,
if you're an Arab shake, you don't necessarily want the best army,
but a very loyal army. And for that,
it takes three things to keep the military happy and feeling that you take them
into account, what better way than to give them the latest equipment,
pay them well, and make sure that the officers remained.
Loyal.
In these countries. Military careers are not about choosing the best candidates,
but the most submissive or those closest to power.
That is why high ranking commanders tend to be chosen from certain circles or
clans, particularly close to those of the Royal family, even.
So the applicants are subjected to investigation, not only for their background,
but also the background of their family. Then once chosen,
they are paid very well.
For example,
a Colonel's monthly salary in the United Arab Emirates is just over $27,000 per
month tax-free and if they also travel abroad,
then they get paid an additional $1,000 for each day that they spend outside the
country.
Once you've chosen them and then pay them very well,
then you give them the best ways to keep them entertained. And that's it.
You're all set friends. As you can see, in many cases,
the armies in these Arab countries have been built on very weak foundations
where military effectiveness was the least important factor.
And that explains precisely why they're so expensive and at the same time.
So defective.
Now when the time of reckoning arrives,
which armies are best prepared for confrontation,
the Iranian army or those armies from Arab Petrie monarchies. Well,
that is something that we'll examine in an upcoming video.
So don't forget to subscribe to visual politics in any case,
despite everything that has happened over the last few years,
there has been one country that has made a huge leap forward in terms of the
preparation of its armed forces,
a country that is even being dubbed the Arab spotter.
We talked about it here in this past video here on visual politics,
but now has this story of armies and petrodollars been interesting for you.
Well, if it has been, give us a, like, I really hope you enjoyed this video.
You want to learn more about politics and world affairs,
and here's some more of my lovely voice. Um,
check out the reconsidered podcast where we don't do the thinking for you find
reconsider@wwwdotreconsideredmedia.com or on Apple or Google play or your
favorite podcast.